Tab key navigation, another pattern.
So a question I get a lot
is when to use the arrow
keys when you're creating
accessible user interfaces.
So we use the tab key for links,
buttons, form controls, etc.
I think there's a temptation and
I guess we skipped down the page.
There is a temptation to use
arrow keys for things like menus.
And on websites,
it's usually not necessary.
So the ARIA menu roles,
that is a menu role or
that is an RE a role that you can use.
There's a lot of components
that have to go into it.
Including using the wiring of
JavaScript to work on arrow keys.
We tend to only recommend
that ARIA menu for
really app like kind of
a desktop style app menu.
So if you're just writing a header for
a website with lists of links,
you don't need all of that.
You can just keep it simple, let things
navigate in their normal tab order
with the tab key, just use lists of links,
let them have their normal roles,
don't even bother with aria-role-menu.
Cuz often people slap aria-role-menu and
then they don't do
the rest of the pattern.
And it's a lot of work, so just,
yeah, that's another ARIA pitfall.
But areas where we do
want tab key navigation,
we can make it happen using tab index.
So we learned about tab index so far.
It takes different values.
So tab index of 0 will put something in
the tab order when it wasn't already.
If it has positive values,
like 1, 5, 32,000,
[LAUGH] seen that before,
that will put it in an ordered, tab order.
And it's tough, cuz you have to
manage all of those numbers.
So just use 0.
Everything will go in the order
that it is in the DOM.
The -1 will pull a link or
a button out of the tab order
that was otherwise reachable.
Or it'll add the ability to
script focus like we saw with
the wrapper element
technique on the skip links.
So tab index is how we make
tab key navigation work, and
I'll show you what I mean.
If I scroll down here to an example.
We have this little tab switcher.
So I hit Tab.
Only one of these tabs is actually
reachable with the tab Key.
Instead, if I use the arrow keys on
these tabs, it can cycle through.
And so that's what we mean when
we say tab key navigation.
And so this example, this is an example
from the ARIA Authoring Practices Guide.
So it's really down to basics
showing you with HTML, CSS and
Javascript how to make
an accessible tab switcher.
But for, like I was saying, for
lists of links, it would be overkill,
we just don't need to implement
something that robust for menus usually.
If it's like a web app,
maybe it would be more appropriate.
So to make this happen, let's make this,
I guess stack blitz won't get any bigger.
So for their implementation,
we have the ARIA roles for a tab list.
These buttons are reachable by default.
So they're focusable, just like any
button, until you put tab index of -1.
So this uses a technique that's
called roving tabindex, where only
one button in a set has tab index of 0,
and every other one you set to the -1.
So that's how we could see, let's do this.
So each one of these, like before you load
the Javascript, these are all reachable.
But Javascript goes in,
I guess it depends on how they wrote this.
But the tab next to -1 on each one
of these will mean that you have
to use Javascript to move focus around,
so it's dynamic.
Other patterns that this would
be useful for are date pickers,
like if you have a calendar,
you don't want a tab through 30 days.
[LAUGH] That'd be so annoying.
So we'd use this technique for when we
want one tab stop for a calendar, for
example, and the arrow keys will
navigate you through all these items.
So the tab index is really the workhorse
here of making this work and JavaScript.
And probably some CSS.
But what I'm saying is that
tab index is really powerful.
And so we can make these interactive
widgets with some scripting.
And so I like to use
ARIA Authoring Practices Guide examples,
cuz they do sort of strip away some
of the other things that we see
in web apps like TypeScript and
state and all those things.
So the alternative to some of that code,
and let's go over here and
see what their script looks like cuz
this uses just vanilla JavaScript.
So they iterate through the tabs,
this uses DOM APIs
like querySelectorAll instead
of using JSX and React.
Keeps track of which tabs are active.
There are some event listeners for
clicking and
for key down, so you can use both.
And then setting the selected tab.
So this is kind of the alternative to
what JSX and React does for us a lot,
is that we don't have to go in and
remove attributes manually.
It makes it really easy to set
state right there in your template.
But a lot of the JavaScript to do this
kind of accessibility stuff without
a framework, it's totally doable,
it's just a little bit more verbose.
And so the components of this are keeping
track of which tab needs to be selected.
Here's where the tab
index is getting changed.
They're also changing aria-selected so
that the state of it updates,
it's true or false.
Setting and removing of attributes.
This also moves focus.
So talking about roving tab index, right,
so only one of these is focusable.
I can iterate through here and
change all those attributes,
but I also have to move focus there.
So that's part of this pattern is
you change the tab index on it,
and then you set focus onto that element.
And so
this type of pattern you'll see a lot when
you get into these types of widgets.
And so here's the event handlers.
We have an on key down that watches for
the arrow keys.
And that's how it selects.
What tabs, kind of depending
on where we are in the order.
And the click event is a little
bit simpler cuz you just click on
the one you want.
But with arrow keys,
we have to actually figure out, well,
where are you in the list?
What's gonna happen to the right,
what's gonna happen to the left, and
all that sort of stuff.
And some of this, we still do in React,
like you still have to listen for
the key events, you still have to
keep track of which ones are current.
We were doing a lot of that
in our examples earlier, but
with this we are manually setting and
removing attributes instead of just
changing state variables
like we were in React.
Okay, so tab keys versus the arrow keys.
And I think the ARIA Authoring
Practices Guide do a really good job of
talking about some of the expected
keyboard navigation conventions.
So you can read up on those if there's
other patterns, if you're like,
man this pattern we're working
on looks an awful lot like
this one in
the ARIA Authoring Practices Guide.
You could go and see,
is there some part of those conventions
that you could incorporate.
I do have to say though,
do you really need the arrow keys?
Probably not, [LAUGH] sort of touched on
that, but I have a screenshot from Costco.
They have a big mega menu and
they just let it be lists of links.
So they didn't go for
the whole ARIA menu rule thing.
I think it works pretty well, but you can
look at like any major e-commerce site and
kind of see what approach
should they take.
And some sights put a lot more effort
into accessibility than others [LAUGH].
But it's still fascinating
to see what's out there.
What are teams doing?
What would I love to fix
if I worked on that team?
That's kind of an interesting
thought process.
Okay, activeElement.
So when we are managing focus,
we have a really helpful DOM API
called the activeElement API.
This will tell you which element
is focused at any given time.
And sometimes it can be
hard to tell otherwise.
If you're debugging focus
in a lot of components.
Maybe there's some that were meant for
mobile, but they're not actually hidden,
and you just can't figure out where your
focus is cuz it's like in a weird state.
I have a tool for you.
So this bit of code, this listener
document.body.addEventListener focusin.
You can add one listener on the body, and
then any element that's focused inside
of it, you can log to the console
using document.activeElement.
So let's do that real quick.
Let's do it on, Let's see,
maybe just this site.
So I'm gonna open up the console,
and I use this frequently.
So I'm gonna hit Paste.
Maybe there's a bookmarklet or
something, you could do the same thing.
But with the console open still,
I'm gonna hit Tab, and
it will tell me it will log every
element that I'm tabbing on.
And if it's going through things that
are behind a modal or in a layer you can't
see, you're gonna get your answer
pretty quickly of where your focus was.
So that can be just in your bag of
tricks of debugging techniques,
being able to log the active
element is really helpful.
It's also helpful,
If you need to restore focus somewhere,
if you open a modal layer and
you're writing the code to make that work,
you can store what the users focus
was on before they took the action.
You can store that in a variable, and then
you can send them back to the same place.
So the activeElement API is kind
of the mechanism to keep track of
where the user's focus was.
Or your focus in the event of
the debugging we just looked at.
And so don't forget visual focus styles,
kinda when we're
talking about activeElements and
trying to figure out which
elements are focused using skip links and
targets and all that.
Visual focus outlines are super important.
And so when we're debugging
with that development,
that's one area where it can be
kind of useful is to surface.
Well, is there an element that I'm
focused on that I just can't see for
whatever reason?
Maybe you just don't know where
you are on the screen cuz
things are positioned in a weird way and
it doesn't have a focus style.
That can be one pathway to
figuring out how to fix it.
Cuz sometimes it might end
up in a weird tab order for
some reason and
just tapping through the pages and enough.
That's where this DOM APIs,
just like one of those tools
that you might need some day.